## FROM THE DESK OF THE EDITORS


### **_Dear Reader…_**

Welcome back to another thrilling issue of the **Game Workers Unite magazine**.
By the time this mag, hot off the presses, reaches your shaking, excited hands,
GWU will be celebrating its **first anniversary**. We thought we'd take a moment
to reflect on the tidings of the past year, both good and ill.

**Let's start with the ill**. Telltale, Capcom Vancouver, Visceral, Big Fish,
Disney Canada, Six Foot, Trion Worlds, Carbine, Motiga, Boss Key, Runic, Bartlet
Jones, Wargaming Seattle, Gazillion, Eugen, Firemonkeys, ArenaNet and NCSoft,
GOG, Techland, NetEase, Torus, EON, and Activision Blizzard — and forgive us if
we've forgotten anyone, it's been a little hard to keep count — all suffered
mass layoffs or were shuttered outright.

You might not recognize all these names, but if you've been in the industry for
a while there's a good chance you know someone who's been affected. Between
September and October 2018 alone, **at least 800 game workers** lost their jobs.
February 2019's toll stands at **at least 1000 lost jobs**. With the swift drop
of an axe, the Firemonkeys layoffs singlehandedly shrank the Australian games
industry workforce by 5% — just months after they extended an invitation to
former Capcom and Telltale employees on Twitter noting they were hiring[^1]. All
in all, **thousands of industry jobs have been lost over the past year**.

Why are all these layoffs happening, you ask? Why, record-breaking revenues, of
course! In a press release to investors the day layoffs started at Activision,
CEO Bobby Kotick wrote: "While our financial results for 2018 were the **best in
our history**, we didn't realize our full potential."[^2] (_Full potential_?
Seriously? He sounds like a parent disowning their child for getting perfect
grades and an inbox full of scholarship offers. We'd also be remiss to fail to
note that Kotick himself is one of the highest-paid CEOs — not just in the games
industry, not just in tech, not just in America, but everywhere, of all time.)
Elsewhere, Telltale's fall from massive critical and commercial success, widely
attributed to routine mismanagement and nearsighted pursuit of profit on the
part of its shareholders, is by now well-documented[^3].

It's been a rough, scary year for those of us working in the industry, and signs
don't point to things getting better anytime soon. **But we're starting to fight
back**.

In that same year of tumult, **over 25 local chapters of Game Workers Unite**
were founded around the world. Earlier this year, **GWU UK formed an official
trade union** in partnership with the Independent Workers Union of Great Britain
(IWGB), joining the Syndicat des Travailleu.rs.ses du Jeu Vidéo (STJV) in France
and the Game Makers of Finland as one of the first official unions representing
game workers. GWU members have made zines, pamphlets, and other literature, and
we've organized or taken part in dozens of panels, presentations, workshops, and
public events. We've spoken to press, podcasters, and YouTubers, and helped
shine a light on working conditions in the industry and the urgent need for
unionization.

But more than all that, **we've been engaging in on-the-ground organizing**.
We've been forming workplace committees and building collective power to win
concrete demands. This is arguably the most critical work we've been doing, but
it's also the riskiest to talk about publicly. Organizing is a long haul, and
doing it in the open only puts workers' jobs and well-being on the line. But **a
sea change is happening**, even if you can't feel the waves from the shore.

Crucially, **we're not alone**. The international labour movement is picking up
steam: in India, **between 150 and 200 million workers** joined a general strike
against the Modi government's anti-labour policies. (For context, a strike of
comparable size in Europe would include the **entire combined labour force of
the UK, Germany, France, Italy, Spain, and Portugal**.) The 2018 US prison
strike, where inmates demanded an end to prison slavery, dehumanizing
conditions, and racial discrimination, saw participation in at least 17 states
and solidarity actions across North America and around the globe. Even in the
tech sector (which historically has not been fertile ground for labor
organizing) significant movements and actions are taking place. At Google,
employees banded together to protest military AI contracts and organized a
walkout against sexual harassment and a culture hostile to marginalized
people[^4]. At Microsoft, workers are also in the process of organizing against
the militarization of consumer technology like the Hololens[^5]. Meanwhile, an
international wave of strikes in education, healthcare, hospitality,
transportation, and many other industries showcased the scale and scope of
workers' dissatisfaction with the status quo.

Together, we have the capacity to build a better, fairer, and more sustainable
future for workers all around the globe. If you're a worker in games, abuses
like **mass layoffs**, **crunch**, and **harassment** might seem like
unavoidable realities of the industry. **But they don't have to be**. Join us.


## What Can Unions Do to Help?

A union is an organization of workers dedicated to **improving wages, hours, and
working conditions** within their workplace or industry through collective
bargaining. **Unions leverage the collective power of workers** to balance out
the power held by bosses and shareholders.

As workers, all of us benefit from past unionizing efforts. Here are some things
unions have fought for and won in the past:

Abolishing child labour • Safety regulations • Health care insurance •
Unemployment insurance • Ending unpaid overtime • Protection from mass layoffs
and unfair firings • Anti-harassment policies • Closing the wage gap • Paid sick
leave • Paid parental leave • Annual Leave • Pensions • Week-ends • Meal breaks

In the sections that follow we'll break down some of the specific ways that
unions can help workers in the game industry.


### Layoffs

Most game work is contract or "project"-based, meaning that many game workers
may find themselves out of a job when projects (even very successful ones) are
launched. This is already an unhealthy way to work, but on top of that sometimes
workers are laid off without any warning whatsoever.

If you've never participated in or been represented by a union, you might be
wondering how it can help with something like mass layoffs; cuts are cuts,
right? Well — not quite. One of the most important things a union can achieve
for a workplace or industry is a **collective agreement** (sometimes called a
collective bargaining agreement, CBA, or collective labour agreement; the term
varies by country). A collective agreement is far from the only way of
organizing or making demands — but it's a common and battle-tested one, and most
collective agreements include some form of protection from layoffs by employers:


> Some CBAs don't allow layoffs **even when the employer claims that it doesn't
> have enough money to pay everyone on payroll**… **Similarly, many CBAs bar
> employers from laying off union workers and subcontracting out their jobs**.

> **Many CBAs require employers to "recall" or rehire laid-off workers once the
> need for the layoff subsides (for example, when work picks up again).**[^6]

In an industry that often experiences cycles of hirings and layoffs as projects
ramp up to full production, go gold, get cancelled, or change in scope, it's
pretty obvious that even a weaker "right to recall" could still help buy workers
extra stability and peace of mind.

> "Sponge metaphor" of the talent pool?

> ANIMATION INDUSTRY HAD A SCANDAL ON THIS, POSSIBLE REFERENCE? [found the
> piece](https://www.cartoonbrew.com/ideas-commentary/op-ed-why-i-filed-the-wage-theft-lawsuit-against-major-animation-studios-169774.html)!


### Crunch

> In those days, Miyamoto would come to us at 11 PM, after he finished all of
> his board-member work, and say, "**It's Mario time.**" At that point, we'd
> start a planning meeting that would run until 2 AM.

#### — Former Nintendo planner Motoi Okamoto on the development of Mario 64 DS[^7]

Last October, with the release of Red Dead Redemption 2 imminent, Rockstar Games
co-founder and boss Dan Houser proudly declared to New York Magazine that
workers **were**

**regularly putting in 100-hour work weeks getting the game ready to ship**.
Hang on — if you sleep around 8 hours a night there's only 112 hours in a week!
Factor in transit (presuming people weren't sleeping under their desks, which is
not a given), time to eat, etc., and that works out to Rockstar labourers
spending almost every waking moment at their job.

Houser later retracted the statement, saying only the writing team was working
those hours, and only during a period of a few weeks. But that only prompted
backlash from current and former workers: some called out the obvious falsehood
of the retraction and told stories of the immense pressure placed on them (one
former worker noted "during the _GTA IV_ era, it was like working with a gun to
your head, 7 days a week") while others were just unhappy to have their
backbreaking labour downplayed and denied by a studio head.

Houser and others seem to think that crunch is a sign of dedication and passion
and speaks to the quality of their game. **But crunch is abusive**. It can go on
for months — even years — and it has very real long-term mental and physical
health impacts for developers. In 2015, _Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory_ creative
director Clint Hocking recalled the effects prolonged crunch had on his health
during development of that game a decade prior:

> [My friend] had spent a week living in my house. I had curtailed my work week
> down from 70-80 hours to a normal 40 in order to spend time with him. We had
> eaten great meals, gone to great bars, seen movies, played games, and talked
> about our careers and the industry and our pasts and our futures, and all of
> it was simply fucking gone. I could not remember any of it.

> To be clear — I do not mean I didn't remember what we did or what we talked
> about. I mean that I literally had no memory of the events. To me it was like
> it never happened. It was like he never visited. There was just an empty space
> in my brain that had been overwritten by the stress and anxiety of Splinter
> Cell. **Splinter Cell: Chaos Theory gave me brain damage.**[^8]

Maybe Hocking got off easy. In 2016, a South Korean game developer was
acknowledged to have "died from a work-related cause" after putting in months of
intense overtime[^9].

> A bill passed by the Abe government that comes into effect this April will
> impose an "overtime cap" on corporations — though it limits that amount to 100
> hours per month per person (equivalent to five hours of overtime every working
> day) making it an almost implicit condonement of conditions.

Many in the game industry try to paint crunch as unavoidable, but we believe it
is ultimately a story of poor planning and unreachable deadlines — and more
importantly, of **putting profits above the human beings whose labour makes
games**. Concretely, unions can discourage crunch by **ensuring that employees
are paid for overtime**, by **increasing overtime rates**, and by **putting a
hard limit on how many hours of overtime can be required in a given day or
week**. This helps those already in the industry, but it also makes it more
likely that employers will hire more people instead of cheating prospective
workers out of a job by forcing too much work on existing employees.

> When in Bioware they said they had a three-month crunch, we laughed. During
> the Witcher 3, a lot of people crunched for over a year — some of them for
> three years.

> Witcher 3 development kept getting worse by the month. The morale got very low
> and everyone ended up complaining during crunch supper. Some of us were still
> looking forward to being moved to Cyberpunk and having a fresh start with a
> "new" project. When we finally started switching to Cyberpunk… things got even
> wilder, even more chaotic. At that time, almost everybody in my team wanted to
> leave.

#### — CD Projekt Red developer on conditions at the studio[^10]


### Harassment

Harassment has been a well-known problem in the game industry for years now, but
so far **bosses have done little to actually address the issue** apart from
releasing boilerplate statements about how the company "condemns harassment."
When harassment happens inside the workplace, workers often have nowhere to
turn. HR departments are supposed to be the first port of call, but too often
they're more concerned with protecting the company's public image than they are
with protecting the employees.

Unions can help by providing workers with a place they can go to make sure their
concerns are heard, and unlike HR, they are directly answerable to the workers
they represent. While an individual worker could be ignored or even fired for
talking about their experiences with harassment (especially if the harasser is
in a position of power within the company), they are much more likely to be
taken seriously when they have the** backing of other employees**. Unions can
also push for systemic changes, such as the introduction of anti-harassment
policies or training programs, that help prevent harassment from happening in
the first place.

Harassment is more likely to happen in situations where employers or managers
have unilateral power to make or break an employee's career, and therefore
**anything that tips the balance of power in favour of employees also helps
reduce harassment**. Since harassment is often tied to discrimination and a lack
of diversity in the workplace, measures that increase diversity such as fairer
hiring practices, wage equity, or more comprehensive health benefits, can also
be a way to curb harassment.[^11]

Marginalized workers, who are more likely to be the targets of harassment, are
**already organizing** in many workplaces through whisper networks and informal
support groups. These efforts often form the foundations for wider organizing
campaigns, and help build solidarity, trust, and mutual respect between workers.
While businesses push workers to compete with one another for jobs or raises,
creating a hostile and toxic work culture, the process of unionizing encourages
workers to come together to solve their problems collectively. **Solidarity is
key to building a successful union campaign**, and once workers realize this,
they are more likely to change views and behaviours that ultimately just serve
to divide and disempower us.


### Creative Control

You might believe your bosses' motivation is to create great games, and in some
cases that may be true, but at the end of the day they also have to sell those
games, and that has a direct influence on creative decisions. Executives don't
necessarily care that the development team is aiming to make, say, a great
single-player game, but they _do_ care about how Battle Royale games are
outselling everything else right now and how microtransactions are a major
driver of revenue for large publishers. So the order comes from above to add
those things to the project, even if they are creatively incompatible.

The pursuit of profit is what drives bosses to prioritize one project over
another, to think about ad placement, to change design based on market research,
and make other kinds of creative compromises. This is also what leads companies
to cancel more experimental projects in favour of the "safe bet," or force
workers to meet unrealistic deadlines in order to release before the holiday
season.

If you work in the industry, **how often have you had to implement or cut
features following a decision by an executive**, which ended up being
detrimental to the quality of the game? **Don't you wish you'd had the power to
negotiate in that kind of situation?** Don't you wish you'd at least been asked
for your input, instead of having to work silently in a direction only to have
to start again from scratch a month later because higher-ups decided a new trend
needed to be worked into the project somehow?

**Workers in the game industry are passionate about what they do — that's why
companies get away with exploiting them! — so it is particularly hurtful when
they're forced to create things that they don't believe in. **Whether workers
ultimately agree with management's decisions or not, at least **in a unionized
workplace, their opinion gets to be voiced and heard.**

Workers who operate in worker co-ops agree that the structure of their studio is
itself an integral part of their ability to create better games. (More on worker
co-ops later!) A studio with a strong unionized workforce or a worker co-op not
only helps improve conditions in the workplace, but it would also allow the
people who actually make the games to exercise more creative control, to put
their efforts towards something they believe in.

> daryl gates & sierra
> [https://waypoint.vice.com/en_us/article/a3n8ea/how-sierra-and-a-disgraced-cop-made-the-most-reactionary-game-of-the-90s](https://waypoint.vice.com/en_us/article/a3n8ea/how-sierra-and-a-disgraced-cop-made-the-most-reactionary-game-of-the-90s)


### Crediting Issues

In games, credits are one of the most important ways your efforts as a worker
get noticed. If you're new to the games industry, you might believe that getting
credited for your work on a game is a straightforward process. But that's not
always the case. Rockstar, for example, is known for holding credits over
workers' heads as a reward for finishing work on a game. As journalist Richard
Moss wrote last year[^12]:

> For studios, crediting can be a tool for leverage … [Rockstar] has long
> maintained a policy of not crediting people who worked on a game unless they
> were present when it shipped, to encourage the team "to get to the finish
> line."

This form of "encouragement" is not just manipulative, it hurts workers' ability
to find future employment.

Workers in other industries (such as film) have fought for and won the right to
proper crediting through unions.[^13] Unions can do the same for the games
industry.


### Better Pay

**> mention collective agreements as mechanism**

**Unionized workers have higher wages on average than workers who are not
unionized**, often between 15 to 25% more. **Unions also benefit workers who are
not unionized** by raising the bar for everyone. For example, a high school
graduate whose workplace is **not** unionized but who works in an industry
that's 25% unionized overall can still expect to be paid more than similar
workers in less unionized industries.  \
([http://www.epi.org/publication/briefingpapers_bp143/](http://www.epi.org/publication/briefingpapers_bp143/))

 \
**Unions can also help reduce inequality.** While** all **workers benefit from
having unions, those who benefit the most are typically the people who are the
**most disempowered or in the most precarious positions.**

> [Unions](https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2017/4/17/15290674/union-labor-movement-europe-bargaining-fight-15-ghent)
> get higher pay for their members by demanding money that would otherwise go to
> shareholders and executives, and so shareholders and executives have every
> reason to fight union drives,

> "passion tax"

> montreal salary collusion


## Versus Mode: Owners vs. Workers

The recent round of layoffs at Activision-Blizzard and elsewhere have made it
all too clear that **game industry bosses are prioritizing short-term profit
over the health and livelihoods of workers**. CEOs like Bobby Kotick are
rewarded for treating workers as disposable, even when those same workers help
to generate record revenue for the company. No matter how well the company is
doing, shareholders and executives never seem to be satisfied, and are
constantly searching for new ways to cut costs and boost profits, often at the
expense of workers. Why does this keep happening? To better understand it, we
need to look past the PR and into how the ownership of these companies is
structured, where the profits go, and where decision-making power actually lies.

**Any business is above all made up of its workers**: they are the ones who are
actually producing what the business sells, and whose labor is the source of its
profits. But who do these profits go to? Not to them, but rather to those who
happen to own the company: the shareholders. Large publicly-traded corporations
can have millions of shareholders, and while some companies can be owned by a
single business owner, even tiny startups typically have outside investors as
shareholders beyond the original founders.

To shareholders, all that the business represents is a source of profit, either
through the business itself increasing in value, or through money dividends.
**Shareholders might not have any real connection to the company** or even care
about what it does, let alone care about the welfare of its workers. They have
money, and they buy shares because they want this money to grow into more money,
without doing any work for it. (Creating this additional value does take work,
but that work is done by workers like you and me, not by them.)

> Jorgensen says the shuttering [of Visceral] was **purely a business
> decision..**. "You've got to cut the bridge when you realize you can't really
> make a lot of money on something, so that's the decision we made."

#### — Gamasutra speaking to EA CFO Blake Jorgensen on the reasons for Visceral Studios' closure[^14]

The main way shareholders exercise control over corporations is through
elections of the board of directors. Shareholders leverage the amount of voting
shares they have to influence board elections, making the board directly
accountable to them. Executive officers like the CEO are appointed by the board
of directors, directly linking management, the board, and shareholders.**
**Management ultimately only answers to the board of directors, and the board of
directors answers to shareholders and shareholders only.  **They have no
accountability to the workers.**

Legislation varies, but CEOs have "fiduciary duty" to the shareholders, which
effectively means that they are **legally required** to maximize profits. They
can even be sued for putting ethical concerns above the duty of increasing value
for shareholders! Not that they need the extra motivation: upper management's
loyalty to shareholders is usually ensured by granting them shares as
compensation, as well as large bonuses tied to company profits.

Shareholders always have the option to sell their shares and buy into a
different company, so if a business doesn't perform well enough in terms of
profits in the short-term, the value of the shares decreases. The consequence is
that businesses are not merely driven to make a profit, but to make the
**highest possible profit** in the short-term, over anything else. And one of
the main ways of increasing profits is to minimize expenses such as salaries to
workers, which is why the mass layoffs keep recurring. Studios can hire a bunch
of game developers as work ramps up on a large project, make them crunch
unreasonable hours to get it released as fast as possible, then lay off most of
them after sales start coming in to ensure that salary expenses are minimized
and profits kept as high as possible.** **This isn't "bad management", **it's
the system working as designed**: executives making decisions for the benefit of
the owners, at the expense of the rest of us.

This is why we also typically see share value increase after every round of
layoffs, as happened recently with Activision Blizzard: when mass layoffs get
announced, management is sending a message to shareholders that they are willing
to do what it takes to ensure ever-increasing profits** no matter what**, and
this makes company shares more attractive on the market.** **Shareholders are
thrilled**! **They get richer, and the rest of us get poorer. That's why the
decision is made in the first place, not out of any real necessity, despite how
they try to spin it to the workers.

—

It's not a question of "good bosses" vs "bad bosses." **Workers and owners have
fundamentally different interests.** Most of the things that benefit workers —
higher wages, shorter working hours, better benefits, job security, a safer work
environment — also cut into company profits. In short, **every dollar that goes
to your wage is a dollar that doesn't go to the owners**. In order to maximize
profit, many bosses will try and squeeze as much labour as possible out of their
workforce while keeping wages as low as possible. Long periods of unpaid
overtime are common in the game industry in part because bosses have (so far)
been able to get away with it, despite laws that make unpaid overtime illegal in
many countries.

Often bosses justify this treatment by arguing that anyone who complains just
isn't "passionate" enough. But selective appeals to passion are just another
strategy to wring more out of workers who just want to be able to make games
sustainably and hone their craft without burning out. Unlike workers, **owners
and bosses don't actually care about making the best game possible**. Their
first priority is to make money — and right now they're the ones calling the
shots, without any accountability to the people _actually making the game_.

But it doesn't have to be this way! Workers have the potential power to change
this dynamic and to force the businesses they work for to take their best
interests into consideration too. This is because in every industry, every
business, it's always their labor that is the source of all the owners' profits.
**When it comes down to it, it's owners who need the workers, not the other way
around.** Isolated from each other, workers are completely vulnerable to the
whims of management, as they are devalued and reduced to having to beg for
better conditions — but united and organized, workers can build the leverage to
actually negotiate with management from a position of power. **Unionizing is the
only way to tip the balance in the other direction** and create a better game
industry for all workers!

Beyond this, **we can also imagine a different way to structure the industry**,
one that would not fundamentally rely on the exploitation of workers for the
benefit of shareholders. This is where worker cooperatives come in: businesses
with no external shareholders that are entirely and collectively owned by all
the workers who work there themselves, allowing them to earn the full benefit of
their labour. Check page X for more info on worker cooperatives.


## How gamer rage is harnessed to discipline workers

> Sam [Dan's brother and Rockstar president] and I talk about this a lot, and
> it's that games are still magical. **It's like they're made by elves…** You
> turn on the screen and it's just this world that exists on TV. **I think you
> gain something by not knowing how they're made.**

#### — Rockstar Games' co-founder Dan Houser on the development of Red Dead Redemption 2 [^15]

There is no real reason why workers and consumers should have different
interests or be at odds with one another. When you think about it, it sounds
absurd! Many workers take a great deal of pride and personal satisfaction from
making games that players love to play, and without workers there would be no
games for players to enjoy in the first place. Unfortunately, **many players
don't know the conditions under which games are made** (in large part because
bosses prevent workers from talking about it publicly!). They are also
encouraged to see themselves as having a special relationship with a brand, a
company, or a product, rather than with the real people making the games they
play. This dynamic encourages consumers to blame workers when things go wrong
and benefits owners. Throwing workers under the bus directs negative attention
away from the bosses, even when they're the ones responsible for making
decisions that hurt consumers. It can also serve as an intimidation tactic that
can be used to discipline workers.

We're unfortunately all too familiar with the way a small but extremely vocal
minority of consumers take entitlement to the next level in their relationship
to developers. As more game workers speak up about working conditions in the
industry, **we've also seen hate-driven harassment campaigns appearing in
response**. Often this harassment specifically targets marginalized workers who
are** **simply trying to participate in the creative direction of the games they
build and speak to their own struggles, backgrounds, and experiences. Individual
workers become singled out and targeted by an online mob of entitled consumers
who don't want to see the game industry become more welcoming to new voices and
who scapegoat them for everything they believe is wrong with games.

Sadly, they often succeed in goading bosses into punishing or even firing these
workers: two well-known examples are last year's firing of Jessica Price and
Peter Fries from ArenaNet[^16] and the dismissal of Alison Rapp from Nintendo in
2016[^17]. Look a little closer and you'll discover these aren't isolated cases:
in private conversation, in whisper networks, **incidents like these are all too
common**.

Giving in to demands from angry, reactionary gamers is a convenient excuse for
bosses to get rid of "troublesome" workers — like, say, someone speaking out
about sexism and racism in their workplace. **Many game industry bosses see
their priorities as being more in line with the harassers than with the people
who work for them.** (THQ Nordic recently reminded us of this by choosing to do
a marketing Q&A on 8chan, a website known for harboring Nazis, enabling the
spread of child porn, and playing a leading role in massive hate campaigns
targeted against marginalized game workers.)

In these situations, management will often pretend to have the best interests of
workers in mind even as they systematically yield to the slightest strain and
validate gamer entitlement. **This can lead to bosses implementing new ways of
controlling, suppressing, and disciplining their workers, all under the guise of
"protecting them" from such harassment.** (Protecting from what? Getting fired
for standing up to harassment? Some protection racket that is!) After ArenaNet
president Mike O'Brien fired developers Price and Fries at the demand of an
online mob — for committing the egregious offence of pushing back against the
misogyny women game designers face in the industry — many employers jumped on
the occasion to introduce new social media policies restricting what their
employees are allowed to express online outside of working hours. These policies
effectively make workers responsible for being a 24/7 brand ambassador on top of
their regular job — and for no additional compensation, to boot. (What a
bargain!)

In a statement to Polygon a month after the ArenaNet incident, Riot Games
(themselves still grappling with an _internal_ culture of sexism and
harassment[^18]) clarified their apparently long-standing position on employees'
use of social media:

> "**Direct engagement with players online and IRL is something we encourage all
> Rioters to do** if they feel comfortable doing so. [...] **For many years
> we've provided training to every Rioter about how to have _authentic and
> appropriate_ player conversations**."[^19]

In her article from October on the topic, "_Worse than Scabs: Gamer Rage as
Anti-Union Violence_"[^20], Lana Polansky writes:

> "**As long as gamers direct their grievances at individual workers**,
> videogame companies understand that they can use that dynamic **to shield
> themselves from community criticism **while** using it as leverage** in
> internal conflicts with employees. This has, for a long time, represented a
> win-win for companies, ensuring not just the PR victory with their fans, but
> also a deeply suppressed and compliant workforce, and an opaque shroud over
> the industry's internal workings. That shroud, however, seems to be starting
> to clear."

We saw such tactics being deployed most clearly against voice actors of the game
industry in 2016, when studio owners at Activision, EA, Disney, Warner Bros,
Take-Two, and others launched a website[^21] and video explicitly targeted at a
gamer audience and demonizing the SAG-AFTRA voice actors' union for demanding,
among other things, better safety standards for voice strain and risks
associated with stunt coordination (for motion capture), an improved structure
for bonus payments, transparency and employment mobility. The rhetoric being
that those things would somehow lead to worse games for consumers, in a
transparent effort to direct fan rage at the workers.

Executives ultimately answer to shareholders and investors, and thus to the
profit motive. They'll give in to the cry of a vocal, angry minority of
perceived fans _even if the consequence in the long-term is a worse game_. We
can't rely on them to have our backs on this front: **we need to have each
other's**. The best way to resist harassment — and the summary, mob-driven
firings that so often seem to follow — is by organizing. And if gamers really
want to see better games, **they should focus their attention on the bosses and
the conditions employees are forced to work under**, not on individual
vulnerable employees that are easily scapegoated. But for this to mean anything,
**the conversation also needs to go beyond a simplistic call to "vote with your
dollars"** and to buy more from the "good companies" and less from the bad ones.
Player support for unionization will go much farther towards crafting a better
industry.


## Boss Fight Tips & Tricks


### Union-busting tactics to look out for

As union talk continues to spread throughout the game industry, bosses who feel
threatened are turning to an arsenal of tactics to break up organizing and
discourage and demoralize workers. **Thankfully for us, their toolbox is rather
limited**, and throughout every industry and every era, we keep seeing the exact
same dirty tricks being re-used by bosses over and over again. This means that
**by learning to recognize them and warning our fellow workers about them, we
can be ready and prepared when they inevitably get pulled out** and render them
ineffective. Here's a few classics:


### The "Captive Audience" Meeting

If management ever catches wind that there's organizing (or even just vague
union talk) happening at the workplace, their first response will usually be to
call a "captive audience" meeting. All employees will be required to attend, and
the meeting will be a one-way affair where management goes over standard
union-busting talking points in **an effort to sow fear, suspicion, and
distrust**. The goal is to reach any workers who are uneducated about unions
before their organizing co-workers do, and feed them negative preconceptions on
the topic. You're likely to see many of the other union-busting moves in this
list being deployed at those meetings, and the best way to counter them is for
you and your co-workers to be prepared and to know what to expect!

Note also that when it comes to the topic of unionizing, managers will often
repeat these talking points on any platform they have access to, such as game
industry conferences or industry-oriented websites…


### The "Open Door" Policy

Bosses often encourage workers to talk to them directly about workplace issues,
insisting their "door is always open" and that no one will be reprimanded for
sharing concerns. A well-worn tactic everywhere from the game industry to
companies like Wal-Mart or Amazon[^22], this "open door policy" sounds harmless
on the surface.

In fact, **this is the number one way management maintains full control over
information flow in the workplace **and ensure they are able to nip any seed of
organizing in the bud. They'll say they are here to help and are genuinely
concerned about your well-being. But the catch is that** it's a way to ensure
workers only ever interact with management alone, as isolated and disempowered
individuals, instead of turning to their coworkers for support and solidarity**.
Bosses will make vague promises and excuses, reassuring you that your issues are
taken seriously and will be addressed eventually, while also instructing you to
keep things quiet and only ever discuss the issue in question directly with
management. If they do catch you sharing concerns with other workers, it
probably won't take long for that supportive demeanor to disappear, which is why
**it's important to make sure any initial organizing you do happens away from
the eyes and ears of management**.


### "Unions might be great for other companies/industries, but it's different here!"

Whether it's because games are "too creative a medium," "too recent an
industry," "too dependent on flexibility" (boss-speak for worker precarity) or
because the company is "too indie," or "too large," not making enough money or
"making too much" — you'll hear all sorts of reasons why your job is very
special, unique, and different when it comes to unionizing. The funny thing, of
course, is that every boss in every industry says the exact same thing to their
workers! (Protip: It's never true.)


### Framing the union as a "third party"

Many bosses try and frame unions as some kind of external third party that will
come in between you and your employer, ruining your happy family relationship,
or maybe trying to get rich off your back. (Projection much?) You might even
hear that they are dangerous radicals seeking to overthrow capitalism! (Oh no!)
But in reality the union is not "they" — it's you. **It's you and your
co-workers who form this potential union and decide every action it takes**, not
some outside strangers — and what your bosses fundamentally fear is **the
empowerment that you will gain through organizing**.


### "You can't have a union, because you're not really employees!"

More and more employers try to paper over the true nature of the relationship
they have with their workers by referring to them as "partners" or "associates"
instead of employees, for example, or by pretending that we're all just one big
group of friends; **it's just that some friends own the company, and others
don't!** Another common tactic is to give "manager" titles to just about
everyone in the company, but with none of the decision-making power or
additional pay that usually accompanies such a role.

Perhaps most importantly, **many workers in the game industry who should be
recognized as full employees are instead hired as freelance contractors as a way
for owners to get around the legal obligations they owe to employees**. This is
an especially common problem in sectors like QA. However, there is a growing
number of unions that specialize in helping such workers fight for better
conditions or gain full employee status. Recently, artists and lecturers
(primarily women) at Britain's National Gallery won a case which confirmed that,
because they were required to attend training sessions and were paid from the
same source as non-contractual employees, they were not in fact self-employed.
This meant they were entitled to the same benefits as so-called "permanent"
employees.[^23] **Remember that if you're hired to work for someone who makes a
profit from selling what you produce, you can unionize**.


### Threats of outsourcing and cuts

A common line — and one frequently internalized by workers — is that if workers
unionize, bosses will make cuts to jobs or outsource them to where labour is
cheaper and less organized. Whether management is assuring you that they're
really sorry but they have no choice and it's "just the way it is," or they're
openly threatening direct retaliation for unionizing, **the important thing to
keep in mind is that the goal of these threats is to create fear and compliance
through intimidation. They usually have no basis in anything concrete**.

Bosses lay off workers all the time for no good reason, and unionizing is the
only way you have to protect yourself from that. Remember that it's always our
labor that creates value for the business owners, and that they can't get rid of
all of us or they'd be getting rid of the very source of all their profits.
Besides, **relocating is an extremely expensive endeavour for any business to
make, and not something that can be decided on a whim simply to punish workers
for unionizing**. This is especially true if the union movement is one that
crosses borders in such a way that there's nowhere for the owners to go —
emphasizing why it's so important for our organizing efforts to be international
in nature and in solidarity with fellow workers all around the world!


### The "Guilt Trip"

Some owners, especially those who think of themselves as "good bosses" and
maintain a lot of contact with their employees, might react to unionizing
efforts by taking it extremely personally. **Those bosses will try to make you
feel like you are committing some sort of horrible betrayal by contemplating the
possibility of organizing**, and try to shame you for being ungrateful or make
you feel like you somehow owe them for "giving" you a job.

Remember that the core issue is the inequality of power between you and them,
and that they are reacting that way because they are so used to holding that
power over you and acting without any accountability to employees, that **any
step towards a more equal relationship feels to them like some kind of terrible
offence**. Some bosses have been known to respond to union organizing efforts
with tears! These sentiments may even be genuine, but in any case, dealing with
them should be the responsibility of your boss's therapist, not their employees.


### The "Company Union"

Some bosses claim to support unions, and will even offer to help you set one up.
If your boss tries to pull this move, you might think at first you're very lucky
to work for such a progressive employer. They might even bring in people to do
it for you and take care of all the complicated stuff… until you realize that
your new "union" was created without any organizing among the workers
themselves, that it includes company management in its decision-making, that it
reproduces the same power dynamics that were always present in your workplace,
and that it was implemented in a top-down fashion to ensure its loyalty to the
owners over the workers. This sort of cooptation can really succeed at
appropriating and neutralizing pro-union sentiment, dramatically setting back
any genuine organizing efforts —** don't let it happen to you!**

A similar role is played in our broader industry by **some currently-existing
industry organizations, who publicly claim to represent game developers but in
practice are led and funded exclusively by business owners and management**, and
have consistently sided with their interests over those of workers whenever they
conflict. The IGDA is of course one of these organizations (see our review of
the IGDA in the previous issue!) but there are other examples too. A similar
role is played in Québec by "La Guilde", and in France by the "Syndicat National
du Jeu Vidéo" (the SNJV, not to be confused with the STJV, the _actual_ French
game workers' union).


### Scab Labour

One of the dirtiest tricks a boss can employ, **"scabs" are people who, as
workers themselves and thus potential members of a union, receive special
preferential treatment over others in exchange for turning against their fellow
workers**. Scabs are often brought in temporarily from the outside in an
emergency as a way to replace workers who are trying to unionize. Bosses will
sometimes even make a point of offering scabs all the demands that the
organizing workers originally put forward, while continuing to refuse them to
the latter - just as a way of demoralizing you by making the point that your
demands can in fact easily be met, but that it's really about punishing you "on
principle" for standing up for your rights.

> Scab voice actor labor!
> *   life is strange (during the sag-aftra strike, so even worse!)
> *   re2 remake
> *   nintendo by policy doesn't work with union labour (such as voice actors) at all… and it shows

In order to work towards the long-term goal of a unionized game industry, it
will be important to create a culture where taking a scab contract is treated as
the despicable, selfish act that it is — and one that harms the scabs themselves
in the longer term.

## Workers' Cooperatives: A New Way of Creating Commercial Games


### No Bosses Required!

Many workers in the game industry cope with the less-than-ideal working
conditions by dreaming of one day starting their own business and "becoming
their own boss." And it makes sense! Who wants to be exploited for someone
else's profits when you could start your own studio and earn the full benefit of
your labour?

**Game workers are also particularly lucky that they work in an industry where
starting your own game studio, although far from being accessible to everyone,
is much easier than, say, starting your own car factory as an auto worker.**
Game studios need much less starting capital — no expensive machinery or raw
materials are required.

**The problem with the traditional "startup" model, however, is that it
inevitably tends to replicate the worst problems of the existing game
industry.** The few founders who are lucky enough to launch a successful
business might never need to get a job working for someone else ever again, but
it will be at the expense of the workers they hire as employees as their
business expands. Their employees will be the ones now working for their
profits, thus reproducing the relationship of exploitation that is found
everywhere else in the industry.

But it doesn't have to be that way! **This is where workers' cooperatives come
in: workers' co-ops are businesses that are fully and democratically owned by
the people who work there.** Nobody in a workers' co-op is working to create
profits for some shareholder, and everyone can earn the full value of their
labour. When the co-op expands, new workers become worker-owners, as opposed to
merely being employees hired by separate business owners. Many people who start
a business don't even know that this is an option!

There are already multiple examples of workers' cooperatives operating in the
game industry, such as **Pixel Pushers Union 512** and **Motion Twin** (the
creators of _Dead Cells_). And two of the creators of _Night in the Woods_ have
just launched a workers' cooperative called **The Glory Society**. Cooperatives
can also be a great model for freelance workers, who can benefit from uniting
under a single banner to sell their services.

There are many kinds of organizations that call themselves "cooperatives", which
is why we emphasize that we're talking about **workers' co-ops** here. You may
also have heard of "consumer co-ops," which are owned by the consumers (such as
REI in the United States or MEC in Canada), but those can be just as
exploitative to their employees as any other business. There are even some
business owners' associations that style themselves as "cooperatives" — in the
Québec game industry, for instance, a group called _La Guilde_ has gotten
significant media attention and funding and now proudly claims to be the
"largest cooperative in this industry in the world"[^24] — but in actuality
they're nothing more than cartels. So this can get pretty confusing and might be
worth highlighting, especially when discussing the possibility of starting a
workers' co-op with fellow game workers who might never have heard of that
business model.

**So how do you go about starting a workers' cooperative?** Your local Game
Workers Unite chapter is here to help, and can put you in touch with the legal
assistance you need to found such a business with your fellow workers!
Unfortunately, most business lawyers who help people form startups have no
experience with co-ops. They're often used to just signing people up for the
standard corporate model instead, so having access to specialized advice can be
a big help in forming a co-op. The details also vary from place to place, but
starting a co-op is an option everywhere. Another thing to keep in mind is that
venture capitalists will not want to invest in a workers' cooperative, since
they can't become external shareholders and reap in the profits from your work -
so they will always focus on pressuring aspiring entrepreneurs to start
traditional corporate startups instead. That said, workers' co-ops are still
perfectly eligible for business loans, and credit unions often have especially
favorable deals for them!

**So if you're considering starting a business or know game workers who are,
contact your local GWU chapter and ask them about workers' co-ops!**


## Strategy Guide: How to Start Organizing your Workplace

Interested in organizing with your coworkers, but don't know where to start?
Here are six simple steps to get you on your way to forming a union! **Make sure
to keep discussions about the possibility of unionizing away from the ears of
employers, even if you think they're sympathetic to your cause.**


1. **Reach out to existing unions** and organizations in your area for help,
   advice, and solidarity. Game Workers Unite chapters, related trade and
   industrial unions, and existing game worker unions internationally are all
   great resources for learning how to organize your own workplace, and
   establishing relationships now can strengthen both parties' actions in the
   future. **If possible, talk to experienced organizers or attend a training
   session on workplace organizing. **
2. **Talk to your coworkers** one-on-one about their problems in the workplace,
   away from the supervision of management. Ask questions, and let them tell you
   the things that they want to fix; listen carefully, and don't assume you know
   what their problems are. Be supportive and understanding, and help them
   realize they're not alone in these issues. **Don't start talking about unions
   yet!** Start by identifying problems to solve.
3. **Help them identify collective solutions** to the problems they've shared.
   Just talking about issues isn't enough; stopping there can build frustration
   and anger without being constructive with those feelings. Your goal is to
   guide your co-workers towards seeing collective action as a solution to their
   problems, by asking questions and listening to their answers. Open-ended
   questions like "Who else feels this way?" and "What would happen if…" are
   useful. **Always be honest! **Don't oversell what's possible, and don't
   minimize the potential dangers.
4. **Organize a first action** to solve a simple, achievable problem. You don't
   need the whole office on board! Start with 10% of your coworkers, and target
   something concrete and achievable: demanding free coffee, or complaining to
   the boss as a group. By winning these fights, you and your coworkers will see
   the power of collective action, gain courage and experience, and inspire
   others to join in the next action. **Before you take that first action,
   though…**
5. **Prepare your coworkers for the bosses' reaction** when they find out you're
   organizing. Bosses have a lot of tactics to break up organizing workers, and
   they can be very effective and intimidating to the unprepared, but they're
   also very predictable. Learn these tactics yourself, and share them with your
   coworkers. These plays are much less effective when people know they're
   coming, and you've already had a chance to counter their anti-union lines.
6. **Push your coworkers to become organizers themselves**. You can't do
   everything yourself, so help your coworkers become more involved by giving
   them tasks and following up. A task can be anything from taking notes at a
   meeting, to designing and printing flyers, to bringing in new members
   themselves. Don't forget to set deadlines and follow up on these tasks; this
   is real and important work, and doing it is empowering. Eventually, your
   coworkers will be suggesting their own tasks and managing themselves!

**Only go public when you're confident you have the backing of the majority of
your workforce** and you have a concrete plan that everyone has agreed upon.
People are routinely fired for trying to unionize, so make sure to protect your
privacy, and the privacy of your fellow workers. In most countries a worker's
right to unionize is protected under law, so make sure to inform yourself on
what your rights are (local unions can help with this).

Even if you don't work in the game industry yourself, there are still lots of
other ways you can support organizing efforts:


1. **Help unionize your own industry, or get involved in your own union**! The
   more workers that are organized, the more potential there is for
   cross-industry solidarity and mutual aid. And the more unionization gains
   momentum across industries, the more it becomes a logical path for
   unorganized sectors.
2. **Talk to players about why unions are important** and how they can address
   problems that affect both workers and consumers. Remind them that the
   conditions and pressures that result in compromised games (or abusive
   mechanics like loot boxes) aren't the choice of the workers — we hate that
   stuff too and we want to make the best games possible! — but the result of
   bosses' decisions.
3. **Signal boost workers in the industry** who speak out about working
   conditions. If you're a streamer, a writer, or someone who makes videos, talk
   about these issues in the work you produce. (There's lots of different
   avenues to explore, too — we'd love to see a broader historical perspective
   on how labour issues have been part of games since the beginning.)
4. **Join Game Workers Unite and get involved** in on-the-ground organizing
   efforts! We actively encourage players, academics, and anyone who wants to
   improve conditions in the industry to engage in the community and help us
   succeed.

Reach out to us for more details. The GWU membership application as well as
links to local chapters are available here:
[www.gameworkersunite.org/get-involved](http://www.gameworkersunite.org/get-involved)

If there's no GWU chapter in your area, contact the international and we can
help put you in touch with local unions and even help you start a new chapter!


## And remember: you're not in this fight alone! Together, we can win better working conditions for **everyone**.


[^1]: _Tweet by @TheFiremonkeys_, Sep 2018 https://twitter.com/thefiremonkeys/status/1043333183268257792

[^2]: https://kotaku.com/activision-blizzard-begins-massive-layoffs-1832571288

[^3]: _How Telltale Went Broke_, Super Bunnyhop, Oct 2018: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2VR7Hl6SuXE

[^4]: Google Walkout twitter account: https://twitter.com/GoogleWalkout

[^5]: _Microsoft workers call for canceling military contract for technology that could turn warfare into a 'video game'_:
    https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2019/02/22/microsoft-workers-call-cancelling-military-contract-technology-that-could-turn-warfare-into-video-game

[^6]: "Union Employees: Are You Protected From Layoffs?" https://bit.ly/2IWnBBE

[^7]: At Nintendo, Working All Night Is 'Mario Time'  https://kotaku.com/at-nintendo-working-all-night-is-mario-time-1794042341


[^8]: Clint Hocking's blog - Ten Years Down
     [https://clicknothing.typepad.com/click_nothing/2015/03/ten-years-down.html](https://clicknothing.typepad.com/click_nothing/2015/03/ten-years-down.html)

[^9]: Crunch mode caused a young Netmarble game developer's death, Korean
     government says
     [https://massivelyop.com/2017/08/04/crunch-mode-caused-a-young-netmarble-game-developers-death-korean-government-says/](https://massivelyop.com/2017/08/04/crunch-mode-caused-a-young-netmarble-game-developers-death-korean-government-says/)

[^10]: _CD Projekt Red developers speak up..._ https://www.gamezone.com/news/cd-projekt-red-developers-speak-up-on-the-realities-of-working-on-witcher-3-and-cyberpunk-2077-3461430/


[^11]:
     [https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2017/11/organizations-sexual-harassment/546707/](https://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2017/11/organizations-sexual-harassment/546707/)

[^12]:
     [https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/329003/How_bad_crediting_hurts_the_game_industry_and_muddles_history.php](https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/329003/How_bad_crediting_hurts_the_game_industry_and_muddles_history.php)

[^13]:
     [http://www.bccfu.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/2015-2018-BCCFU-MASTER-AGREEMENT-Appendix-C.pdf](http://www.bccfu.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/2015-2018-BCCFU-MASTER-AGREEMENT-Appendix-C.pdf)

[^14]:
<p>
    Gamasutra - EA: Visceral's canned Star Wars project too linear for modern tastes <a href="https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/310630/EA_Viscerals_canned_Star_Wars_project_too_linear_for_modern_tastes.php">https://www.gamasutra.com/view/news/310630/EA_Viscerals_canned_Star_Wars_project_too_linear_for_modern_tastes.php</a></p>


[^15]:
<p>
     "Red Dead Redemption 2's labor controversy, explained", Polygon, 2018 <a href="https://www.polygon.com/2018/10/27/18029154/red-dead-redemption-2-working-conditions-rockstar-games-overtime-labor">https://www.polygon.com/2018/10/27/18029154/red-dead-redemption-2-working-conditions-rockstar-games-overtime-labor</a></p>


[^16]:
     [https://www.polygon.com/2018/7/9/17549492/arenanet-jessica-price-guild-wars-2-writer-fired](https://www.polygon.com/2018/7/9/17549492/arenanet-jessica-price-guild-wars-2-writer-fired)

[^17]:
     [https://kotaku.com/nintendo-employee-terminated-after-smear-campaign-over-1768100368](https://kotaku.com/nintendo-employee-terminated-after-smear-campaign-over-1768100368)

[^18]:
     [https://kotaku.com/inside-the-culture-of-sexism-at-riot-games-1828165483](https://kotaku.com/inside-the-culture-of-sexism-at-riot-games-1828165483)

[^19]:
     [https://www.polygon.com/2018/8/29/17792676/gaming-toxic-employee-harassment-survey-ccp-eve-online-arenanet](https://www.polygon.com/2018/8/29/17792676/gaming-toxic-employee-harassment-survey-ccp-eve-online-arenanet)

[^20]:
     [https://rhizome.org/editorial/2018/oct/30/worse-than-scabs-gamer-rager-as-anti-worker-violence/](https://rhizome.org/editorial/2018/oct/30/worse-than-scabs-gamer-rager-as-anti-worker-violence/)

[^21]:
     [https://www.polygon.com/2016/10/28/13458724/voice-actors-strike-video-game-website-attacks](https://www.polygon.com/2016/10/28/13458724/voice-actors-strike-video-game-website-attacks)

[^22]:
     [https://gizmodo.com/amazons-aggressive-anti-union-tactics-revealed-in-leake-1829305201](https://gizmodo.com/amazons-aggressive-anti-union-tactics-revealed-in-leake-1829305201)

[^23]:
     https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/national-gallery-workers-rights-gig-economy-public-sector-employment-tribunal-art-educators-a8803641.html

[^24]: La Guilde Receives a $750,000 Grant:
    [https://ici.radio-canada.ca/nouvelle/1147343/guilde-jeux-independants-quebec-cooperative-desjardins](https://ici.radio-canada.ca/nouvelle/1147343/guilde-jeux-independants-quebec-cooperative-desjardins)

